gRPC e-book Chapter 4 (#14305)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/grpc-for-wcf-developers/ws-protocols.md

---
title: WS-* protocols - gRPC for WCF Developers
description: Review of the WS-* protocols supported by WCF and alternatives available with gRPC
author: markrendle
ms.date: 09/02/2019
---

# WS-\* protocols

One of the real benefits of working with Windows Communication Foundation (WCF) was that it supported many of the existing _WS-\*_ standard protocols. This section will briefly cover how gRPC manages the same WS-\* protocols and discuss what options are available when there's no alternative.

## Metadata Exchange - WS-Policy, WS-Discovery, and so on

> SOAP services expose Web Services Description Language (WSDL) schema documents with information such as data formats, operations, or communication options. This schema could be used to generate the client code.

Reviewer: WS-Discovery is used for more than a dynamic client. For example, although it doesn't use WS-Discovery, when you first run outlook, you provide your email address and it uses the domain part to do autodiscovery (using dns) to find your exchange server. So you don't need to use server reflection, you could have a client created from a known .proto but need to discover where your server which implements that .proto can be found. DNS based auto-discovery might be an alternative (which is what outlook/exchange actually uses).

gRPC works best when servers and clients are generated from the same `.proto` files, but a server reflection optional extension does provide a way to expose dynamic information from a running server. For more information, see the [Grpc.Reflection](https://nuget.org/packages/Grpc.Reflection) NuGet package and the [gRPC C# Server Reflection](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/csharp/server_reflection.md) article.

## Security – WS-Security, WS-Federation, XML Encryption, and so on

> Security, authentication, and authorization are covered in much more detail in [Chapter 6](authentication.md). But it's worth noting here that, unlike WCF, gRPC doesn't support WS-Security, WS Federation, or XML Encryption. Even so, gRPC offers greater security than WCF because all gRPC communications are automatically encrypted because of HTTP/2 TLS, and can use X509 certificates for mutual client/server authentication.

Reviewer: What's your basis for saying gRPC offers greater security than WCF? The reason why I don't like that sentence is it implies there are problems with WCF security, especially when Microsoft is the one publishing this book. Never mind the fact that there's a strong argument to be made that WCF provides greater security than gRPC. I could list a dozen security features that WCF provides which gRPC doesn't. The word "greater" is ambiguous.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, sorry about that, wasn't supposed to say "greater".

## WS-ReliableMessaging

> gRPC transport provides similar guarantees to WCF Reliable Sessions without any need for additional configuration or code.

Reviewer: It does not provide similar guarantees. I just spoke with the asp.net core team to verify and gRPC doesn't do any of the things that WS-ReliableMessaging provides.

## WS-Transaction, WS-Coordination

> WCF’s implementation of distributed transactions uses Windows’ Microsoft Distributed Transaction Coordinator or MSDTC. It works with resource managers that specifically support it, like SQL Server, MSMQ, or Windows file systems. In the modern, open, cross-platform microservices world, there's no equivalent. For a discussion of transactions, see [Appendix A](appendix.md).

Reviewer: WS-Transaction is an open standard and WCF at least works with at least one Java based SOAP stack. It is open and cross-platform. It's not modern as nobody has reinvented that wheel yet.

---
title: WS-* protocols - gRPC for WCF Developers
description: TO BE WRITTEN
author: markrendle
ms.date: 09/02/2019
---

# WS-* protocols

One of the real benefits of working with WCF was that it supported many of the existing *WS-\** standard protocols. In this section, we will briefly cover how these same WS-* protocols are managed in gRPC and, where there is no alternative, discuss what options are available.

## Metadata Exchange - WS-Policy, WS-Discovery, etc

> SOAP services expose Web Services Description Language (WSDL) schema documents with information about data formats, operations, communication options etc. This could be used to generate Client code.

Reviewer 3: This could be used -> This schema could be used?

gRPC works best when servers and clients are generated from the same `.proto` files, but a server reflection optional extension does provide a way to expose dynamic information from a running server. See the [Grpc.Reflection Nuget package](https://nuget.org/packages/Grpc.Reflection) and [the documentation](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/csharp/server_reflection.md)

## Security – WS-Security, WS-Federation, XML Encryption, etc

> We will cover security, authentication and authorization in much more detail in Chapter 6. But it is worth noting here that, unlike WCF, gRPC does not support WS-Security, WS Federation, or XML Encryption. Even so, gRPC offers greater security than WCF because all gRPC communications are automatically encrypted because of HTTP/2 TLS, and can use X509 certificates for mutual client/server authentication.

Reviewer 3: link to chapter 6?

## WS-ReliableMessaging

gRPC transport provides similar guarantees to WCF Reliable Sessions without any need for additional configuration or code.

## WS-Transaction, WS-Coordination

> WCF’s implementation of distributed transactions uses Windows’ Microsoft Distributed Transaction Coordinator or MSDTC. It works with resource managers that specifically support it, like SQL Server, MSMQ, Windows file systems, etc. In the modern, open, cross-platform microservices world there is no equivalent. See Appendix A for a discussion of transactions.

Reviewer 3: link to appendix A?

## Metadata Exchange - WS-Policy, WS-Discovery, and so on

SOAP services expose Web Services Description Language (WSDL) schema documents with information such as data formats, operations, or communication options. This schema could be used to generate the client code.

gRPC works best when servers and clients are generated from the same `.proto` files, but a server reflection optional extension does provide a way to expose dynamic information from a running server. For more information, see the [Grpc.Reflection](https://nuget.org/packages/Grpc.Reflection) NuGet package and the [gRPC C# Server Reflection](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/csharp/server_reflection.md) article.

The WS-Discovery protocol is used to locate services on a local network. gRPC services are generally located using DNS or a service registry such as Consul or ZooKeeper.

## Security – WS-Security, WS-Federation, XML Encryption, and so on

> Security, authentication, and authorization are covered in much more detail in [Chapter 6](authentication.md). But it's worth noting here that, unlike WCF, gRPC doesn't support WS-Security, WS Federation, or XML Encryption. Even so, gRPC provides excellent security; all gRPC network traffic is automatically encrypted when using HTTP/2 over TLS, and X509 certificates may be used for mutual client/server authentication.

Reviewer: Typo: WS-Federation.  
Also I thought gRPC can use WS-Federation, but the authentication token is used in a different way than WCF uses it. Maybe say "gRPC doesn't support WS-Security or WS-Federation with WS-Security" but then it starts getting a bit wordy and confusing. I'm not quite sure what the best way is to explain this. The key thing I think is if a customer today is using WS-Federation with WCF, then they can use WS-Federation with gRPC, it's just plumbed and configured differently.
Not a blocker though as this is getting into nuance.

## WS-ReliableMessaging

> gRPC does not provide an equivalent to WS-ReliableMessaging. Retry semantics should be handled in code, possibly with a library like [Polly](https://github.com/App-vNext/Polly). When running in Kubernetes or similar orchestration environments, [service meshes](service-mesh.md) can also help to provide reliable messaging between services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gRPC does not provide an equivalent to WS-ReliableMessaging. Retry semantics should be handled in code, possibly with a library like [Polly](https://github.com/App-vNext/Polly). When running in Kubernetes or similar orchestration environments, [service meshes](service-mesh.md) can also help to provide reliability between services.
```
Use of the phrase "reliable messaging" suggests it's the same thing as that's tied to the WS-* protocol. The key thing is it helps with reliability.
Not a blocker for preview as again a nuance.
